# The problems societies face

Society is plagued by innumerable problems. Some are small-scale, such as a phone battery that dies
on your way home, or navigating your way through an unknown region. Some problems are medium-scale,
like public transportation systems being offline for a few hours, and moving away from loved ones.
Loss of life is unlikely, but thousands, or even millions of people can be inconvenienced by these
issues.

Some problems are large-scale: mental health issues, ensuring that everyone has access to education,
power grid blackouts, and road accidents. These complications will impact the quality of an
individual's life, and unfortuantely, sometimes cause incredible suffering or even death. Speeding,
driver fatigue, drugs (including alcohol), unrestrained passengers, and limited visibility are all
directly responsible for serious injury and death.

Some problems will have catastrophic consequences on society and other ecosystems, if they are not
solved, or at least mitigated. The United Nations has outlines nineteen of the most challenging
problems we face today. Climate change, for example, places exorbitant levels of stress on our
societies and to the environment. The ramifications of climate change are catastrophic: should our
sea levels rise too high, then our coastal cities will suffer unimaginable flooding. Weather
patterns shift, thanks to climate change, and this can affect the supply of food.

Perhaps one solution to climate change is to consider atomic energy as an alternative primary source
to the traditional primary sources such as coal, natural gas, and crude oil. Atomic energy is full
of its own problems: we haven't yet worked out how to achieve nuclear fusion, the storage and
disposal of nuclear waste is tricky, and nuclear reactors can suffer from major meltdowns: Chernobyl
in Ukraine, and Fukushima in Japan have both had catastrophic ramifications to their surrounding
cities.

We are an ageing population. The ramifications of an ageing population permeate the whole fabric of
society, and with it, a host of sub-problems arise. Cancer is primarily an "old-people's disease",
meaning that it is more likely to affect the old, than the youthful. As we age, we are more likely
to develop cataracts, macular degeneration, and glaucoma. Arthritis is another health-related issue
that needs to be overcome. But health concerns are not the only problems that the elderly face.
The Australian elderly are rife with economic problems: a fifth of people who are at least 55 claim
that their age hinders their ability to find employment, at least one quarter live in poverty, and
seven percent of homeless Australians are comprised of people aged 65 and over.

Access to high-quality health is not a luxury that we all enjoy. While many diseases have been
exterminated, we've just established that society is rife with health problems that kill or severely
impair the quality of many lives.

# Some solutions to these societal problems

Humans are curious animals. Our ancestors took to the seas, and helped to found the modern world
through exploration. Even today, we stare at the heavens, Earth-bound; and yet, our curiosity drives
us to want to explore our solar system, and beyond. Can we colonise other planets? Are we alone in
the universe? What can outer space tell us about our own planet and its problems? NASA believes that
visiting asteroids and Mars can unlock some of the mysteries about both our solar system and our own
Earth.

The European Space Agency sends both humans and satellites into space. Satellites are critical for
digital navigation: you probably rely on a GPS to make your way through regions that are foreign to
you. Various national entities have launched their own global navigation satellite systems: the US
has the commonly known Global Positioning System (GPS), Russia has GLONASS, China has BeiDou, and by
the end of 2018, the European Union will have their Galileo satellite system online. Satellites
aren't just useful for navigation: they benefit telecommunication, observation, and astronomy.

Many countries rely on satellite communication for telephones -- particularly international calls --
and for Internet connectivity. Televised news and sport programmes are often made available through
satellites. If you live in a different state or country to a friend, and wish to talk with them via
a phone or a video call, you're probably employing one or more satellites without even realising it.

Through our desire to sate our curiosity, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which was working on
ways to enhance Lunar photos, had a massive breakthrough in developing digital image processing in
the mid-1960s. Digital image processing is not just limited to extratestrial research: it is now
heavily applied in the field of medicine, particularly to create and inhance images of organs. This
breakthrough has led to the development and widespread use of CT scans and Magnetic Resonance
Imaging.

CT scans, or CAT scans, are used by medical professionals to help diagnose problems in your body. A
CT scan might be used to detect damage to bones and internal organs, blood flow, strokes, and
cancer. A CT scan can help radiologists understand the finer details about tumors so that they know
how to target it.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging, or MRI scans, are also used by medical professionals, to produce
detailed images of the inside of your body. MRI scans are useful for gaining insight into an
individual's brain and spinal cord, breasts, bones, joints, heart and blood vessels, and internal
organs. As with CT scans, an MRI assists doctors with diagnosis and treatment.

Motor vehicles are consistently evolving: cars have components that assist drivers. Since the 1970s,
drivers have been able to enjoy anti-lock braking systems, commonly known as ABS, which allows a
vehicle's wheels to retain traction with the road surface as the driver brakes. This prevents the
wheels from coming to a complete stop and helps to prevent uncontrolled skidding. More modern cars
have sensors to indicate whether or not all passengers are using their seatbelts, and ways to detect
if the driver is showing symptoms of fatigue. Some cars also have systems that warn you when you
accidentally begin to change lanes. Autonomous cruise control lets drivers tell their vehicle that
they would like the car to automatically adjust the vehicle's speed, so that the distance between
your car and the car in front of you is safe. Satellites, again, can assist even further, by
providing extra information. Vehicles with this adaptive cruise control are considered to be a form
of low-end autonomous car. Industry-wide research is being invested into instruments that can detect
driver intoxication; this could, in time, prevent drivers who exceed the legal alcohol limit from
being on the road.

# How we solve these problems

## Science

Science is an endeavour that we undertake to help us understand the natural world. A scientist is
someone who studies and practices science. The primary goal of science is to develop knowledge
independently from how this knowledge might be applied. In science, our knowledge and understanding
is always debatable. The cardinal objective for a sceintist is to look for evidence that may find
problems in our understanding of the world. For example, the idea that we lived in a geocentric
universe -- that is, the Sun, the stars, and the moon rotated around the Earth -- was widely
understood for nearly two millenea. In the 1500s, a model was published by Copernicus, that
geometrically showed that we live in a heliocentric universe. This radically changed our
understanding of how the world worked. In the 1600s, Kelper expanded Copernicus' model, and Galileo
provided evidence through the use of a telescope. Following this, other astronomers were able to
show that there is no centre to the universe.

Although these ideas are open to change, they are still well-founded. This is because the field of
science is evidence-based: in other words, you can't present an idea that will be accepted by the
scientific community without also demonstrating the steps that you took to reach your conclusion,
including all evidence (including the things that failed). Evidence independently obtained from
unrelated subfields of sceince that complement your research will give your idea more credibility.

Ideas presented in the field of science must be testable. That means that a set of pre-defined, and
well-defined, expectations must be established before you undertake your experiement. This set of
expectations should be partitioned into two independent subsets: one that has expectations to show
your idea is true, and another one that shows your idea is not true. Collecting evidence to support
a test is imperative. Sometimes, collecting evidence is easy, but it is often laborious, and can
sometimes take years to collect. Tests should also be repeatable. This means that anyone can look at
your list of expectations and methodology, and be able to conduct the experiment independently to
you. This is important even for the person presenting the idea, as they will need to repeat their
tests to show that it wasn't a fluke or an accident. Scientific ideas will often contradict popular
opinion, and you mightn't like the results you get.

Research doesn't stop once an idea has been founded. Well-founded ideas in science often lead to
more questions. These then feed back into the beginning of this discussion.

## Engineering

The study of science is commonly applied within the field of engineering, which allows us to develop
technology with practical applications that allow us to solve problems, such as the ones we
discussed earlier. For example, we developed a comprehensive understanding of how different
substances react when exposed to sunlight. From this understanding across more than two centuries,
we have been able to build photovoltaic solar panels that can be used in place of traditional fossil
fuel sources for energy.

While science is the foundation of engineering, science alone doesn't solve societal problems. It
merely helps us understand why we experience the problems that we do, and offers us insight into how
we can solve them. Engineering, on the other hand, exists for two reasons: the first is to unravel
whatever plagues us. The second is to make money.

Engineering involves careful planning, designing, and building of systems. Good engineers are expert
problem solvers, and have developed things from the aeroplanes to tunnels and bridges. Engineering
isn't done by a single person alone: we work in teams, collaborating with many other engineers,
sometimes even when we have different motivations! Some of the most valuable skills that an engineer
can have are their abilities to work with other people across various industries; understand the
problems that others have (so that they may be solved); to discuss ideas with fellow scientists,
engineers, and most importantly, the people who will use the solution; and to listen to other
people's ideas and accept criticism.

Nothing is engineered for the sake of it. Everything that you see today, from the car on the road,
to the dishwasher in your kitchen, to the pipes underground, and the sunblock that you wear in the
summer, are designed with aiding people in mind. Sometimes a system isn't designed to directly help
people, but to help another system, which helps people. For example, a single, newly-designed
molecular compound mightn't be directly useful to us, but it could be part of a larger compound that
forms an antidepressant.

# The role computers play

When the term 'computer' is used, one usually thinks about a personal computer, or a laptop. Some
might think about smartphones, tablets, and calculators, but computers are literally everywhere.
There is a computer in your dishwasher. There are probably dozens of computers in your car. Each
satellite has many computers. There are computers on Mars, and computers that have started to leave
our solar system!

Computers help us land aircraft, and locate tumours. They help us manage farms, and predict weather
patterns. Computers enable us to communicate over phones. They let us bank, and produce films. Most
computers in the world don't look like a box attached to a screen, with a keyboard and a mouse. In
fact, you can't see most of the computers that you interact with in your daily life: they're behind
appliances such as that dishwasher; or they are working very hard, kilometres away, just to power
your home.

Whether you like it or not, we, as a society, have become wholly dependent on computers. The systems
in cars that assist with braking and maintaining safe distances between other cars were both
designed, manufactured, and _are_ computers.

# Computer science

Computers didn't just pop up out of nowhere. Computer science is a practical application of maths,
and involves studying the design and use of computing. Wikipedia summarises this by defining
computer science as the study of automating processes. It is a very broad field, and in modern
times, is relied upon for nearly every industry imagineable.

Software engineering is the application of computer science to solve some sort of practical problem.

## Hardware and software

Computers are divided into two parts: hardware and software. The hardware is the physical bit of the
computer: you can touch it and directly interact with it. Software is different: it's not tangible,
but it's how we, as humans, communicate with the hardware.

For example, consider a remote-control drone. You can pick up the drone, and you can put down the
controller. This is you interacting with the hardware, but it's not very interesting. It becomes
interesting when you press the controls, and the drone does something, such as move up or down. This
is the work of the software: you tell the software on the controller what you want the drone to do,
it then communicates with the software on the drone, which then tells the drone what it should
actually do. You don't see this communication between the controller and the drone, and you don't
see the drone make the decisions it does, but you do see the drone move! This is called observable
behaviour, and we'll be coming back to this over time.

Similarly, when you watch a video on YouTube, you usually do so through a web browser. You might
press a few buttons to select the video that you want to watch, the volume level, and the playback
speed. These inputs tell the software which of the billions of videos to play on your computer, how
loud your computer should play it, and how fast the video should be played. Again, you don't see
your personal computer or smartphone communicate with the server to get the video, but it relies on
lots of hardware to transmit your request from your computer to the YouTube data centre, and then
the video is transmitted back. At both ends, the computers are doing lots of work behind the scenes:
your computer is busy telling YouTube what it wants, and YouTube is locating the video and the
quality your network can handle, before telling your computer what it should be showing you. This
simplistic description already highlights that there is a lot going on!

# Programming

Software is often referred to as computer programs. Programming is the practice of describing how a
computer should behave. Although we use computers to achieve incredible tasks, such as helping
doctors perform surgery or controlling your street lights, computers are rather dumb. In fact, they
are so obtuse that you need to tell computers exactly what to do. Let's run through an example:
we'll say that you live five blocks north-east of the nearest post office, and someone asks you for
directions to get there. The answer, of course, is to walk up this street for three blocks, then
turn right, and continue walking for another two-and-a-half blocks.

But what does it mean to "walk up this street for three blocks"? In fact, what does it even mean "to
walk"? Well, we need to lift our leg, and slightly swing it forward, using our hips. Not too much
though, otherwise it becomes a kick. We then need to lower our leg, so that our heel strikes the
ground, and then our toes. Then we need to lift our other leg, slightly swing that one forward, and
then lower it in the same fashion. Each time we lift a leg, we should be using our toes to spring up
just a little. Again, not too much, or we enter a skip or even a jump! But what does it mean to
"lift our leg" and to "slightly swing it forward, using our hips"? We could go on, and on, for quite
some time, reasoning about how our muscles, bones, nerves, and neurons work.

This level of detail is what computers require. Depending on the type of program you are working on
will dictate the level of detail that you need to specify. Many programmers are responsible for the
direction part of our example: how to get to the post office. Other programmers are responsible for
the kind of programmning that describes how we walk. Others again, will maintain how our muscles
interact with our nerves.

This idea of programmers being responsible for only small parts of the larger problem, "how do we
interact with the world?", and not caring about the rest is called abstraction. Abstraction is an
idiom that talks about a particular level of detail, and that level only. For example, if you are
responsible with following the directions to the post office, you very likely won't care about how
it is that we walk. If you are a programmer that is concerned with how we walk, the idea of getting
to the post office is irrelevant -- we don't just walk to get to the post office -- and what it
means to lift one's leg is detailed enough for your task. Abstraction is a very important principle
in programming, and we'll be relying on it quite a lot.

## Programming languages

All communication happens in some form of language. A language is just a way of expressing what you
mean to someone else. It can be verbal, such as English, or nonverbal, such as making hand gestures
or smoke signals.

A programming language is the way in which programmers communicate with other programmers about what
they want their software to do. Programming languages are also a part of the toolbox that
programmers use to communicate with the computer, so that the computer knows what to do. We'll come
back to that toolbox later.

There are many different programming languages, and they are often suitable for solving different
problems. Some programming languages are suitable for expressing solutions to very specific
problems, while others are able to solve a wide variety of problems, if used correctly.

## C++

C++ is a programming language that offers the right abstractions at the right time. As a result, it
is a practical language to use for building many programs. There is widespread use of software
engineered using C++: most modern web browsers are written using C++, lots of banking software is
built from C++, parts of Facebook are C++-based, your mobile phone has systems that are developed
with C++, many video games and lots of animation software are made possible through C++,
communications technology is dependent on C++, and lots of robotics and smart things are C++-based,
such as self-driving cars and the photo processors on the Mars Rovers. This is by no means an
exhaustive list of applications that C++ has been used for: it's simply to give you an idea of what
you can achieve, once you've learnt how to write programs using C++.

## Ideals

This brings us to the ideals of a C++ programmer. In all of programming, there are some important
ideals, that we must consider:

1. correctness
2. reliability
3. affordability
4. maintainability

Programs that are useful must correctly solve their problem, and should reliably do so. It would be
no good if you went to deposit some money into your bankaccount, and it instead deposited the money
into someone else's account! Not everything requires the same amount of reliability. For example,
while it is annoying for your phone's to autocorrect when you didn't want it to, this is an
acceptable failure. On the other hand, you don't want your car's assisted braking system to suddenly
fail, just because you pressed the brake pedal a bit too hard.

Software must also be affordable. At the end of the day, software exists to help people, and if
people can't afford their solution, they won't use it. Even if your goal is to make money, you can't
do that unless people can afford your product. Finally, software is often used for years: sometimes
even many decades. This means that the software that you write must be maintainable.

Maintainable programs are easier to understand than ones that are not maintainable. This goes both
ways: you are only able to write a program that correctly and reliably solves a problem if, and only
if, you understand the problem and how it is to be solved. Software development takes time and
planning. There are a few stages to this:

1. Analysis
2. Design
3. Programming
4. Testing

We can't just jump into writing a program when someone gives us a problem to solve. We must first
understand the problem: we do this by analysing the problem, assessing what the solution is, and
what level of reliability is necessary. Often, people say what they want at the point of discussion,
but don't articulate what they need. Often, these wants change on a whim, based on their needs. Part
of the analysis section is to determine what people need, and separate it from the wants.

Design revolves around working out what the solution will look like. Systems that are well
thought-out in advance are systems that are easier to maintain. Designing a solution takes time and
effort: you will need to think about how to interact with the users, and how different parts of your
program will interact with each other.

Programming is the part where you express your design in terms of code. The code will then need to
be checked to make sure it correctly solves the problem. We call this stage testing. Testing is a
very critical part of programming, and we'll be looking into how to test our programs quite a lot.

At each stage, we should get feedback from both the users of our program, so that we know that we
are staying on-course with respect to their problem and its solution; and we should also get
feedback from our colleagues to make sure that the program we are writing will be maintainable for
years to come. While getting feedback can sometimes be a quick process, it is often lengthy, but it
is critical: there isn't any point to writing a solution if it doesn't meet the users' needs, and
if it isn't maintainable, it might not meet future needs. It is often best to form a solution with
peers, rather than alone: your solutions will be better for this.

# The course

This course teaches you how to write programs using C++. The course is suitable for people who are
novices to C++, even if you already have programming experience; whether it is a year or a decade
doesn't matter. Learning how to write programs using a new programming language is like making a new
friend: you can't skip to the good parts just because you've made other friends. As such, this
course's philosophy is to expose programming novices and experienced programmers to the same
material, so that they develop the same values.

You won't be an expert C++ programmer by the course's end. That takes time and experience. You will,
however, be able to write programs using C++, and develop that experience following this course.
_Applied Modern C++_ will put you in a position that is ripe for understanding computer science,
software engineering, and how to interact with other disciplines.

You'll be required to implement several assignments along the way. They will be automatically graded
by a computer, which will tell you if you met the program requirements correctly and reliably. There
won't be any quizzes, but there are problem sets.

## Resources

This course uses a wide variety of resources. The most important resource is the textbook that we
draw most of our material from: _Programming -- Principles and Practice Using C++_. At the time of
recording, the book is in its second edition. To complete any of the quizzes, you will be required
to purchase a copy of this book. It has valuable content, written by a programmer with over thirty
years of experience with programming in C++, who also taught at Texas A&M University, and is now the
Managing Director for Technology at one of the world's largest banks, Morgan Stanley. You'd do well
to purchase a copy of this book to follow with this course.

The other incredibly important resource that we'll rely upon is the C++ community itself. We
previously discussed how programming is a social activity: you should take advantage of this from
the get-go. There is a Discord channel called hash-include, which is an active and inclusive
community for people who are interested in C++. For those who aren't familiar with Discord, it is
an online chatroom, where you can communicate with others who have similar interests.

We will cover other resources as they become necessecary.

# Next time

In the next video, we'll cover how to get your computer set up for subsequent activities.

# Bibliography

* European Space Agency. _Our Activities_. Retrived from: https://www.esa.int/Our_Activities.
  Date retrieved: 2018-04-29.
* European Space Agency. _Telecommunications Satellites_. Retrieved from:
  https://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Telecommunications_Integrated_Applications/Telecommunications_satellites. Date
  retrieved: 2018-04-29.
* NASA. _Did NASA invent Magnetic Resonnance Imaging (MRI)?_. Retrieved from:
  https://www.nasa.gov/offices/ipp/home/mythbuster/myth_mri.html. Date retrieved: 2018-04-29.
* Stroustrup, B. _Programming -- Principles and Practice Using C++ (Second edition)_. 2014. 
  Addison-Wesley. Upper Saddle River, NJ.
* United Nations. _Global Issues Overview_. Retrieved from: 
  http://www.un.org/en/sections/issues-depth/global-issues-overview/index.html. Date retrieved:
  2018-04-29.
* University of California, Berkeley. _Understanding Science: how science really works_. _What is
  science?_. Retrieved from:
  https://undsci.berkeley.edu/article/0_0_0/%3C?%20echo%20$baseURL;%20?%3E/whatisscience_01. Date
  retrieved: 2018-04-29.
